To examine the effect of ubiquitination on GTP loading, we purified wild-type K-Ras, oncogenic G12V-K-Ras mutant or the ubiquitinated subfraction of wild-type K-Ras from 32P-orthophosphate labeled cells and utilized thin layer chromatography (TLC) and high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) to assess the ratio of 32P-GTP to 32P-GDP that co-purified with each form of K-Ras. As expected based on previous studies, wild-type K-Ras bound primarily 32P-GDP, while G12V-Ras bound 32P-GTP (Fig.2, A and B). Interestingly, the ubiquitinated subfraction of wild-type K-Ras retained a significant amount of 32P-GTP. These results are consistent with a model in which ubiquitination of Lys147 (or Lys117), destabilizes GDP binding, allowing spontaneous GDP/GTP exchange. It could be argued that GTP loading occurs prior to ubiquitination and that the GTP bound form of K-Ras, via interaction with effectors, is preferentially mono-ubiquitinated via a feedback mechanism. While it is difficult to eliminate this possibility, it is unlikely since, as shown in fig. S1B, the T35 mutant of K-Ras, which fails to interact with downstream effectors (fig. S1B) undergoes comparable monobuiquitination to wild type Ras. These results, along with the crystal structure, support a model in which mono-ubiquitination at a Lys residue directly involved in GDP binding either enhances nucleotide exchange on K-Ras, impairs GTP hydrolysis, or both.
To corroborate this finding, we measure the activity of Ras by the GST-RBD pull-down assay. To ensure that ubiquitinated Ras was being detected, the protein pulled down by GST-RBD was subjected to a second affinity purification on a cobalt column to purify the Flag-His-tagged K-Ras. As predicted, only a very small fraction of wild-type K-Ras was pulled down by the GST-RBD (Fig. 2C and fig. S1D), consistent with very little wild-type K-Ras being in the GTP state under these conditions (Fig.2, A and B). However, a much greater fraction of the ubiquitinated-K-Ras was pulled down by the GST-RBD (Fig. 2C and fig. S1D). These results are consistent with a greater fraction of ubiquitinated K-Ras being in the GTP state (Fig. 2, A and B).