We hypothesized that the MEK/ERK pathway may suppress trans-phosphorylation of ERBB3 by directly phosphorylating the JM domains of EGFR and HER2, and that this could be a dominant MEK inhibitor-induced feedback leading to AKT activation in these cancers. We used tandem mass spectrometry to measure the effects of AZD6244 on phosphorylation of this JM domain threonine residue in both EGFR-mutant and HER2- amplified cancer models. Targeting both the phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated peptide forms, we detected a 66% average decrease in EGFR T669 phosphorylation and a 75% decrease in HER2 T677 phosphorylation upon treatment with AZD6244 (Figure 5B, Supplemental Figure 8). Phospho-specific antibodies confirmed that treatment with AZD6244 inhibited phosphorylation of T669 of EGFR and the analogous T677 of HER2 (Figure 5A). Together these data indicate that loss of this inhibitory threonine phosphorylation on the JM domains of EGFR and HER2 occurs in cancer cell lines following MEK inhibition, presumably due to differential subcellular localization and/or binding proteins.

Mutation of T669 and T677 abrogates MEK inhibitor-induced suppression of ERBB3 Activation.

We hypothesized that MEK inhibition activates AKT by inhibiting ERK activity, which blocks an inhibitory threonine phosphorylation on the JM domains of EGFR and HER2, thereby increasing ERBB3 phosphorylation. To test this hypothesis, we transiently transfected CHO-KI cells, which do not express ERBB receptors endogenously, with wild-type ERBB3 with either wild-type EGFR or EGFR T669A. In cells transfected with wild-type EGFR, MEK inhibition led to feedback activation of phospho-ERBB3 and phosho-EGFR, recapitulating the results we had observed in our panel of cancer cell lines (Figure 6A). In contrast, the EGFR T669A mutant increased both basal EGFR and ERBB3 tyrosine phosphorylation that was not augmented by MEK inhibition. As a control, we treated CHO-KI cells expressing EGFR T669A with HRG ligand to induce maximal ERBB3 phosphorylation (Figure 6A), indicating that the lack of induction of phospho-ERBB3 in EGFR T669A expressing cells following MEK inhibition was not simply due to the saturation of the system with phospho-ERBB3. We observed analogous results in CHO-KI cells expressing wild-type ERBB3 in combination with wild-type or T677A mutant HER2 (Figure 6B). Together these results support the hypothesis that inhibition of ERK-mediated phosphorylation of a conserved JM domain threonine residue leads to feedback activation of EGFR, HER2, and ERBB3 (Figure 7).
