Next, we tested whether overexpression of these genes was sufficient to activate the MAPK pathway. At baseline, COT expression increased ERK phosphorylation in a manner comparable to MEK1DD, consistent with MAP kinase pathway activation (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 6). Overexpression of wild-type COT or C-RAF resulted in constitutive phosphorylation of ERK and MEK in the presence of PLX4720, whereas kinase-dead derivatives had no effect (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Fig. 7). Based on these results, we hypothesized that COT and C-RAF drive resistance to RAF inhibition predominantly through re-activation of MAPK signaling. Notably, of the nine candidate ORFs from our initial screen, a subset (3) did not show persistent ERK/MEK phosphorylation following RAF inhibition, suggesting MAPK pathway-independent alteration of drug sensitivity (Supplementary Fig. 8).
Several groups have shown that C-RAF activation and heterodimerization with B-RAF constitute critical components of the cellular response to B-RAF inhibition15–18. In A375 cells, endogenous C-RAF: B-RAF heterodimers were measurable and inducible following treatment with PLX4720 (Supplementary Fig. 9). However, endogenous C-RAF phosphorylation at S338—an event required for C-RAF activation—remained low (Supplementary Fig. 9). In contrast, ectopically expressed C-RAF was phosphorylated on S338 (Supplementary Fig. 9) and its PLX4720 resistance phenotype was associated with sustained MEK/ERK activation (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Fig. 9). Moreover, ectopic expression of a high-activity C-RAF truncation mutant (C-RAF(W22) was more effective than wild-type C-RAF in mediating PLX4720 resistance and ERK activation (Supplementary Fig. 10), further indicating that elevated C-RAF activity may direct resistance to this agent. Consistent with this model, oncogenic alleles of NRAS and KRAS conferred PLX4720 resistance in A375 cells (Fig. 2b) and yielded sustained C-RAF(S338) and ERK phosphorylation in the context of drug treatment (Fig. 2c). Thus, although genetic alterations that engender C-RAF activation (e.g., oncogenic RAS mutations) tend to show mutual exclusivity with B-RAFV600E mutation, such co-occurring events19, 20 might be favored in the context of acquired resistance to B-RAF inhibition.
